---
layout: post
title:  "On the importance of the base currency of a balance sheet"
date: 2020-04-09T14:27:32.381Z
id: 2020-04-09
tags:
  - blog
permalink: /blog/2020-04-09/currency/
redirect_from:
  - /blog/2020-04-09/
---

First I must warn you that I am by no means an accountant; but I would like to share a particularity of reporting accounts in a currency different from the base currency. I'll give an example with an organization that reports its balance sheet in USD but needs to provide progress reports to a partner in CAD.

We will use an accounting chart and standard double-entry accounting. Our chart will look like this for sake of this example:

| NUMBER | DESC                          |
|--------|-------------------------------|
| 1111   | Bank account                  |
| 4444   | Revenue                       |
| 7777   | Expenses                      |

Let's take the following example of activity, the rates being actual rates for the given dates:

| NUM. | DATE       | CAD-USD | Currency | AMOUNT | ACCT | USD EQ.  |
|------|------------|---------|----------|--------|------|----------|
| 1    | 2020-01-07 | 1.30028 | CAD      | (190)  | 4444 | (146.12) |
| 1    | 2020-01-07 | 1.30028 | CAD      | 190    | 1111 | 146.12   |
| 2    | 2020-01-07 | 1.30028 | CAD      | (100)  | 1111 | (76.91)  |
| 2    | 2020-01-07 | 1.30028 | CAD      | 100    | 7777 | 76.91    |
| 3    | 2020-03-18 | 1.45108 | CAD      | (100)  | 1111 | (68.91)  |
| 3    | 2020-03-18 | 1.45108 | CAD      | 100    | 7777 | 68.91    |

Now, if our underlying currency were CAD, our reporting would be quite straightforward:

| NUMBER | CAD    |
|--------|--------|
| 1111   | (10)   |
| 4444   | (190)  |
| 7777   | 200    |
| Total  | 0      |

What's going on here? We got 190 CAD in revenue (if you find it hard to wrap your head around why revenue is recorded as negative, think of it this way: the _world_ is 190 CAD poorer; the world being poorer is your revenue). However we had 200 CAD of expenses, so our bank account (1111) went down by 10 CAD. The total for all accounts is zero, as it should be.

Let's spice things up a bit and record our revenue as USD:

| NUMBER | USD      |
|--------|----------|
| 1111   | 0.30     |
| 4444   | (146.12) |
| 7777   | 145.82   |
| Total  | 0        |

OK the total is still zero, which is good. Everything else requires a bit more thought. First of all, we recorded a net income now, and no longer a net loss. That's because **from a USD perspective**, the 100 CAD we're spending on March 18th is recorded as just 68.91 USD, a far cry from the 76.91 USD that 100 CAD was worth in January. Again, these are real exchange rates so this is not just a theoretical exercise.

So our balance sheet will record a net loss if we're reporting in CAD and a net profit if we're reporting in USD, because we're benefitting from the exchange rate!

Now, let's spice things up even more and say we're reporting in USD, but one of our partners would like a follow-up on our activities in CAD. This, also, is not just theoretical: this is often how international government grants work. The field work is reported in USD (or the country's currency) and the donor needs reports in its home currency (CAD). So here is what we would have a report:

| NUMBER | USD      | CAD equiv.   |
|--------|----------|--------------|
| 1111   | 0.30     | (10)         |
| 4444   | (146.12) | (190)        |
| 7777   | 145.82   | 200          |
| Total  | 0        | 0            |

The above table will look odd, unless you read this blog post first!

## A note on exchange gains and losses

So, we're making money on exchange rates, but why is that not recorded? Well, in the above way of doing things, from the perspective of the organization, that widget they're buying just _costs less in its home currency_ in March than it did in January. To understand when it's appropriate to record currency exchange gains and losses, let's imagine that the 200 CAD revenue was billed and recorded as revenue in January, but paid by the client in March. This would require a few more accounts:

| NUMBER | DESC                          |
|--------|-------------------------------|
| 1111   | Bank account                  |
| 1112   | Receivable from Client A      |
| 4444   | Revenue                       |
| 4445   | Accrued revenue               |
| 5555   | Exchange gain or loss         |
| 7777   | Expenses                      |

Accrued revenue  (account 4445) is revenue that's recorded on paper, but is still receivable from the client. Account 1112 represents assets that are receivable. Account 5555, if positive, is an loss we made on the exchange rates. If Negative, it's a gain we made on the echange rate.

Let's imagine this scenario:

| NUM. | DATE       | CAD-USD | Currency | AMOUNT  | ACCT | USD EQ.  |
|------|------------|---------|----------|---------|------|----------|
| 1    | 2020-01-07 | 1.30028 | CAD      | (190)   | 4445 | (146.12) |
| 1    | 2020-01-07 | 1.30028 | CAD      | 190     | 1112 | 146.12   |
| 2    | 2020-01-07 | 1.30028 | CAD      | (100)   | 1111 | (76.91)  |
| 2    | 2020-01-07 | 1.30028 | CAD      | 100     | 7777 | 76.91    |
| 2.1  | 2020-03-18 | 1.45108 | CAD      | (190)   | 1112 | (130.94) |
| 2.1  | 2020-03-18 | 1.45108 | CAD      | 190     | 1111 | 130.94   |
| 2.2  | 2020-03-18 | 1.45108 | USD      | (15.18) | 1112 | (15.18)  |
| 2.2  | 2020-03-18 | 1.45108 | USD      | 15.18   | 5555 | 15.18    |
| 2.3  | 2020-03-18 | 1.45108 | USD      | (146.12)| 4444 | (146.12) |
| 2.3  | 2020-03-18 | 1.45108 | USD      | 146.12  | 4445 | 146.12   |
| 3    | 2020-03-18 | 1.45108 | CAD      | (100)   | 1111 | (68.91)  |
| 3    | 2020-03-18 | 1.45108 | CAD      | 100     | 7777 | 68.91    |

Take a look, first, at entry number 1: notice that our revenue is recorded as accrued revenue (4445) producing a receivable asset (1112) of 190 CAD, the equivalent of 146.12 USD. _No money has changed hands, just just gave client A an invoice for 190 CAD_.

Let's go out on a limb here and assume client A actually pays the invoice in March. Of course, Client A still pays the amount stated in their currency and doesn't care about exchange rates, so they pay 190 CAD. This triggers a maelstrom of accounting activity:

### Journal entry 2.1

In entry 2.1, we move 190 CAD (_now worth 130.94 USD_) from our receivables account (1112) to our cold hard cash account (1111).

### Journal entry 2.2

From our client's perspective, they paid the full amount on the invoice emitted in January, 190 CAD. However from our perspective, pecause we're reporting in USD, our invoice was for 146.12 USD when it was emitted, and when we recorded our revenue; however when it was paid it was worth only 130.94 USD. As the saying goes, you win some, you lose some. So after journal entry 2.1, our client, in account 1112, still owes 15.18 USD on paper.  To remedy, this we'll remove 15.18 from our client account and record it as an exchange loss (account 5555).

### Journal entry 2.3

In this journal entry, we're transforming accrued revenue (the 146.12 USD we recorded as USD revenue in January) into _actual_ revenue. This means we need to deduct from our actual revenue account (4444) because, don't forget, revenue is recorded as negative, and _add_ to our accrued revenue account (4445) to bring that one 0.

From an accounting perspective, now, we are recording 146.12 USD as real revenue, but an exchange loss expense of 15.18 USD. Let's look at how we would report this:

| NUMBER | USD      | CAD equiv.   |
|--------|----------|--------------|
| 1111   | (14.88)  | (10)         |
| 1112   | 0        | (22.03)      |
| 4444   | (146.12) | (212)        |
| 4445   | 0        | (22)         |
| 5555   | 15.18    | 22.03        |
| 7777   | 145.82   | 145.82       |
| Total  | 0        | 0            |

### The importance of the base currency

Your base currency, we've seen, has a major impact on the underlying way in which your organization conceptualizes its accounting. Simply converting from one currency to another currency is always an endeavour which will yield approximate results. 
